---
# Feel free to add content and custom Front Matter to this file.
# To modify the layout, see https://jekyllrb.com/docs/themes/#overriding-theme-defaults

layout: page
---

<style>body {text-align: justify}</style>

### **Benefits of applying control theory to biology**
#### *(for engineers and control theorists)*

The pursuit of autonomy and artificial intelligence --- particularly in the domain of robotics --- is a major driving force behind funding, research, and technological advances in both academia and industry. However, despite significant investments and breakthroughs, state-of-the-art systems are often bested by biology. One only has to look across the street at the neighbor's cat to see an example of an autonomous being that is at once more agile, energy-efficient, and robust to environmental variations than our best quadruped robots. In general, animals excel at complex tasks (e.g. predator evasion) in highly dynamic and unpredictable environments --- modern engineering systems, for the most part, cannot achieve comparable performance for even simple subsets of these tasks (e.g. legged locomotion, balancing). This contrast is made more remarkable by the fact that, as previously mentioned, animals are composed of organic components that are in many ways inferior to the metal components that make up our robots. In short, animals attain a level of robustness and autonomy that engineers have thus far failed to replicate. By gaining a deeper understanding of how biology accomplishes this, engineers can gain valuable insights to aid in their designs.

The study of sensorimotor systems --- that is, how organisms use sensory information (e.g. vision, hearing, proprioception) to inform decisions and movements --- is highly relevant to the presented motivation. Fortuitously, this is the subfield of biology in which control theory has found the strongest foothold; indeed, the results in this thesis focus on various aspects of the sensorimotor system. The general approach is to utilize control theory to build new models or supplement existing models in order to gain insights into the design principles of biology. Given some dynamical system, objectives, and constraints, we can use control theory to provide mathematical descriptions of optimal system operation and behavior. This can model the behavior of organisms as well as the physiology, if we are clever about the formulation. In addition to sensorimotor systems, many other biological processes (e.g. biomolecular chemical reactions, biocircuits) can be modeled using the tools of ordinary differential equations and dynamical systems. Control theory is a natural extension of dynamical systems theory, and may be applicable to these biological processes as well; this is the subject of ongoing work.

In the realm of engineering, we typically have well-established systems, objectives, and constraints --- the main research problem is how to design the controller to satisfy requirements. In the realm of biology, things are not quite so clear cut; typically, neither system, objectives, nor constraints will be obvious to us. Organisms are complex systems, and we typically only have sparse observations on these systems. For instance, even a small fruit fly has hundreds of thousands of neurons, which coordinate in various ways to produce a rich repertoire of behaviors. However, data on this organism is typically limited to specific clusters of neurons or specific behavioral contexts. This observational sparsity is challenging to engineering researchers unfamiliar with biology, and requires a change in mindset: instead of demanding details that are experimentally costly or impossible to obtain, we want to think about what can be done with the data that is available. This requires making simplifying abstractions, which allow us to provide methods and insights that are dependent on fundamental system properties rather than unknown details. For example, in recent work on cortical feedback ([1](https://arxiv.org/abs/2109.11757){:target="_blank"}, [2](https://arxiv.org/abs/2211.05922){:target="_blank"}), physiological insights arise from the inclusion of sparse communication constraints, and not on any specific numerical quantities. An alternative direction of interest is mixing data-driven techniques and control theory to produce novel quantitative model.

In summary, applying control theory to biology allows us to obtain a better understanding of biological autonomy and efficiency, which can provide design insights for engineers who wish to construct autonomous systems. Along the way, we will also encounter many new and interesting theoretical problems.